.TH bamrefine 1 "January  7, 2023"
.SH NAME
bamrefine \- Mask SNPs from a BAM file
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB bamrefine \fP [OPTIONS][-vtkh] <in.bam> <out.bam>
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBbamrefine\fP processes a BAM file to mask the positions from an
alignment if that read carries a variant position that could be affected
by post-mortem damage (PMD). e.g. If a read carries a C/* position at its
5' end or it carries a G/* position at its 3' end. The regions treated as 5'
or 3' "end" is not pre-defined and should be provided to the program with its
argument (see \fB-l\fP)
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-s, --snps\fP
Path to BED or SNP formatted file for SNP positions and minor and
major alleles. This can be either 4/5 column BED (genomic position
[with or without the `start` position column] + Minor and Major allele)
or SNP (that is used by EIGENSTRAT) formatted files. Format distinction is done by
checking the file extension so it is important that the input file follows
the format of the extension it has. See the sample_data data directory in the installation
path for examples of each of the three supported file types. You can find the installation
directory by running:

\fBpip3 show bamrefine\fP

or

\fBpip show bamrefine\fP
.TP
\fB-p, --threads\fP
Number of threads to run the program in parallel.
.TP
.TP
\fB-l, --pmd-length-threshold\fP
PMD length threshold. Either a single integer (e.g \fB-l 10\fP) or two integers separated
by a comma (e.g \fB-l 2,0\fP) representing different length values corresponding 5' and 3'
ends, respectively. Positions that are up to and including this far in any read
will be evaluated and masked. There is no one-for-all default value that can be set,
so it is highly recommended that you have a prior information about the PMD profiles
of your libraries before you run \fBbamrefine\fP
.SS FLAGS
.TP
\fB-v, --verbose\fP
Verbose output of progress
.TP
\fB-t, --add-tags\fP
Add tags to output BAM file related to masking statistics using optional fields in alignment
records. e.g. ZC:Z:2,1 ZP:Z:0,5;-3 would mean that the program masked n=2 5' and n=1 3' positions
and they were at index 0,5 and -3 in the sequence. 3' masking positions are represented with
negative indices that start counting from the 3' end of the read and is compatible with
python list indices.
.TP
\fB-k, --keep-tmp\fP
Don't remove the temporary run directory. It will include intermediate BAM files,
cached SNPs, etc. This directory is under the same directory with specified output BAM,
named as \fB.YYYY-MM-DD_HH-MM-SS_<out.bam>_tmp_bamrefine\fP
.TP
\fB-h, --help\fP
display a short help message inplace
.SH AUTHOR
Etka Yapar <etka.yapar@gmail.com>

